---
title:  "Listening to the other side"
date:   2021-02-09 00:00:00 +0530
categories: [useless]
tags: [rant]
---

Hi there, lurker. It’s been over a year since I posted anything so I thought I
should amuse you with a rant. So much has changed since I wrote my last blog. I
moved out of my country and completed a master's degree. Yup, I’m wiser now. I
also survived a global pandemic using my life-long training of self-isolation.
It feels like I was made for this very movement. Since you’re reading this, I
assume you survived too. Congrats on staying alive! Vaccines are almost here,
and if what I read on all the conspiracy forums were legit, Bill Gates chan can
finally know how I feel. Hopefully, we will all get microchipped before the end
of this year and go back to regular life.

Onto the actual thing I wanted to discuss — Politics. I was bombarded with
controversial news almost every single week throughout the pandemic. I’m not
sure if my sudden abundance of free time made me notice this or the world has
gotten more contentious these days. I have never seen so much political divide
in my entire lifetime. Now, almost everyone has an opinion on everything, and
people are so stubborn that they don’t even want to have a conversation with the
other side. Not because they have analyzed the issue from different perspectives
and came up with that opinion. Not because the other side doesn’t have a valid
argument. But that if anyone even dares to believe that the other side might
have a reasonable point, they are vile. People label them even before they
listen. And this happens on both sides.

We pay too much attention to the negatives on the other side while conveniently
pushing ours inside the closet. This makes it easier to get polarized. Every
time someone pulls something out of this closet during a discourse, I realized I
take it so personally that I support it for the sake of argument even though it
doesn’t fit into my moral framework. So how do we clean out our closets? By
listening to the other side.

Recently, I was collecting all the sources I followed into a list to help
someone get into the news cycle and realized how much I have started avoiding
the other side. They were in my subscriptions list, but every time I watch them,
the voice inside my head keeps screaming which facts they are conveniently
missing. However, I don’t have the same issue with my side. Even though I know
my side too leaves out details to suit their narrative, I realized I have
learned to overlook it.

The message here is to embrace the argument from both sides before making a
judgment. Even if you disagree with the other side, it is crucial to see why
they stand where they stand. If you notice yourself getting sucked into cheering
for one set of ideas, try pulling yourself out. And here I end my rant. So long!